# Interactive Web-Based Artwork

Live version: <https://comp1720.cecs.anu.edu.au/u6080257/comp1720-2019-major-project/>

This artwork utilises the JavaScript P5 graphics library with a naive simulated version of the JavaScript *sentimood* sentiment analysis API. Dictionaries of word:score pairs are searched based on what the user types which will decide the artworks visual attributes.

# Interaction Statement
The primary interaction format follows the style of an online form. During the first stage of the webpage the user can familiarise themselves with the two main interactive elements present throughout entirety the first half of the piece. The user should also pay attention to the question header during the initial stages of the webpage. Of the three elements two of which are interactable where a user is expected to type within textarea in order to answer the question header. Once typing has completed a user’s only clear course of action would be to click the arrow button which signifies the next stage. This same format will continue for the next 4 question stages. As an acceptable edge case, the user isn’t forced to type anything into the text area in the event a user doesn’t feel comfortable answering the questions and is able to skip straight to the end just by clicking the button (doing this will result in the same artwork each time with minimal change).

This initial interaction format is straightforward especially with only two core elements that a user can interact with. Certain feedback features include a dynamically changing background during each keystroke a user makes, whilst from a design perspective it doesn’t apply any functional benefit it serves to keep the user engaged. Other feedback methods also include an immediate and iterative display of the artwork’s visuals after a user types in a response which allows a user to see how their writing translates into a visual medium.

After question stage is competed the user is brought to the last display page where the final state of the artwork is shown and the previous textarea, submission button, and question header are removed. On this page three interactable elements exist, the two most obvious are the two new buttons on the top left and right of the screen. One of the buttons simply reset the webpage state back to the start of the questionnaire phase and all progress of the artwork reverted. The second button serves to change the background colour based on a randomised selection of rgb values. The final and less explicit interactable is clicking anywhere on the webpage itself which draws a series of vector lines from the origin of each particulate. These vector lines will persist if any mouse button is held down.

# Artist Statement

For my major project I’ve created an interactive art piece to fit the theme of “listening in/ listening out”. By asking a series of questions that encourages user textual input was the primary interactive element used to to generate dynamic visual that is primarily inspired by the works of Casey Reas. The artwork generated by the user input applies a geometric vortex of shapes and lines in order to represent the connotations of what is written with extra supplementation with the inclusion of music pertaining to the detected connotation. By applying this visualization model the component of the theme of “listening in” is handled by what the user writes and the aspect of “listening out” is the creation of dynamic visualization based on what has been written.

The aim of the piece was not to encourage deep introspection nor is it designed to pry into the details of user’s life. The goal was to show that there’s a beauty in all things specifically within oneself; be it their personality or mood, be it good or bad. Connotation of these feelings or opinions no longer matters in this case as there’s something fascinating with how people feel. I wanted to bring about the question of "is it really [some emotion] you think/feel or is it a fantastic explosion of chemicals and electrical signals going through your body that makes it this way? "

Sentiment analysis was the main tool for dictating the attributes of the artwork where any string of text is analyzed to determine if overall the connotations are negative or positive. What is negative or positive is determined by the overall sentiment score where positive and negative integers represent positive and negative sentiments respectively. By defining a classification scheme based on the score range e.g. score ≥ 3 => positive connotation, the program can then begin assigning certain attributes and behaviors to the artwork. 

In order to encourage the user to use be more self-expressive the question prompts needed to be carefully crafted as not to be overly confronting but also interesting enough for the user to want to write. The prompts that appear follow an “icebreaker” approach where simple things such as asking someone how they are is enough gain some data in order to begin generating the art.

The shapes and patterns that are displayed were carefully selected to represent various sentiments. Based on the three main categories of possible sentiments that are based upon the score three sets of shapes can be assigned. Specifically, a sentiment of negative connotation would likely result in sharp triangular patterns being displayed as the sharp vertices of the shape convey a more irritable image which compliments the sentiment appropriately. Sentiments of overall neutrality will result in square patterns as it doesn’t express any strong feelings and thus reflects neutrality well. A positive statement will create circular shapes to display an environment of alacrity. In addition to these primary shapes a series of vector lines also appear that respond to the amplitude of the music that’s being played in the background as well as to the user’s mouse click. The inclusion of these vector lines is to create further visual stimulation as well as to reward further exploration where whatever the user puts in the same amount gets put out.

Movement of the vortex animation was similarly meant to compliment the sentiment of what the user has written. All movement in this case is designed to spin the pattern into a vortex like shape which allows a dynamic approach in representing connotation. A fast and energetic rotation speed represents a positive and exciting feeling whereas a slower one is a more of a relaxed and calm state which is attributed to a more neutral tone. It was a challenge to decide what sort of speed would best represent a negative sentiment so an average between the two speed was chosen in order to provide a middle ground.

Color was one of the biggest challenges in the project as many different colors can be attributed to various emotions with its own good and bad meanings. I chose to stick to primary colors for the moving particles as they each serve as appropriate complements and easily enough fit into the three categories of sentiments. The blue spectrum colors were chosen to represent the negative connotations and the red and warmer colors were chosen to represent the positive. Green was elected to be the neutral colors and was paired with a pastel pink to keep everything light and true to the sentiment. Each of these color designations however did come with their own caveats as there as also added randomization of color mixing with the other primary colors as well as the given option for a user to change the background color. The randomized mix of color was a measure to prevent any sense monotony and was only assigned to the secondary smaller particulates to avoid overpowering the main, larger shapes. The final display stage of the artwork allows for extra interactivity where the user is also allowed to change the background color and explore different contrasts which allows for more unique experiences every time.

As a supplement to the behaviors of the piece music was also included to enhance the overall tone of what has been written. The music chosen once again also was paired with its respective sentiment, except all shared a sense of calming harmonies with soft melodies. Having a overall softer range of music was important as not to distract the user as most of the focus should be placed within the movement and color of the art. With the addition of music there also introduced more ways of allowing different elements of the art piece to interact with itself. In this case the vector lines were used to change their pronouncement commensurate with the amplitude of the music; this added a sense of self-awareness within the patterns themselves which almost gives the user a feeling bringing what they wrote into life.
